Earth is the third planet from the Sun and the only astronomical object known to harbor life. This is enabled by Earth being an ocean world, the only one in the Solar System sustaining liquid surface water. Almost all of Earth's water is contained in its global ocean, covering 70.8% of Earth's crust. The remaining 29.2% of Earth's crust is land, most of which is located in the form of continental landmasses within Earth's land hemisphere. Most of Earth's land is at least somewhat humid and covered by vegetation, while large sheets of ice at Earth's polar deserts retain more water than Earth's groundwater, lakes, rivers, and atmospheric water combined. Earth's crust consists of slowly moving tectonic plates, which interact to produce mountain ranges, volcanoes, and earthquakes. Earth has a liquid outer core that generates a magnetosphere capable of deflecting most of the destructive solar winds and cosmic radiation.
Earth has a dynamic atmosphere, which sustains Earth's surface conditions and protects it from most meteoroids and UV-light at entry. It has a composition of primarily nitrogen and oxygen. Water vapor is widely present in the atmosphere, forming clouds that cover most of the planet. The water vapor acts as a greenhouse gas and, together with other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, particularly carbon dioxide (CO2), creates the conditions for both liquid surface water and water vapor to persist via the capturing of energy from the Sun's light. This process maintains the current average surface temperature of 14.76 °C (58.57 °F), at which water is liquid under normal atmospheric pressure. Differences in the amount of captured energy between geographic regions (as with the equatorial region receiving more sunlight than the polar regions) drive atmospheric and ocean currents, producing a global climate system with different climate regions, and a range of weather phenomena such as precipitation, allowing components such as nitrogen to cycle.
Earth is rounded into an ellipsoid with a circumference of about 40,000 kilometres (25,000 miles). It is the densest planet in the Solar System. Of the four rocky planets, it is the largest and most massive. Earth is about eight light-minutes away from the Sun and orbits it, taking a year (about 365.25 days) to complete one revolution. Earth rotates around its own axis in slightly less than a day (in about 23 hours and 56 minutes). Earth's axis of rotation is tilted with respect to the perpendicular to its orbital plane around the Sun, producing seasons. Earth is orbited by one permanent natural satellite, the Moon, which orbits Earth at 384,400 km (238,900 mi)—1.28 light seconds—and is roughly a quarter as wide as Earth. The Moon's gravity helps stabilize Earth's axis, causes tides and gradually slows Earth's rotation. Tidal locking has made the Moon always face Earth with the same side.
Earth, like most other bodies in the Solar System, formed about 4.5 billion years ago from gas and dust in the early Solar System. During the first billion years of Earth's history, the ocean formed and then life developed within it. Life spread globally and has been altering Earth's atmosphere and surface, leading to the Great Oxidation Event two billion years ago. Humans emerged 300,000 years ago in Africa and have spread across every continent on Earth. Humans depend on Earth's biosphere and natural resources for their survival, but have increasingly impacted the planet's environment. Humanity's current impact on Earth's climate and biosphere is unsustainable, threatening the livelihood of humans and many other forms of life, and causing widespread extinctions.
The name Terra occasionally is used in scientific writing and especially in science fiction to distinguish humanity's inhabited planet from others, while in poetry Tellus has been used to denote personification of the Earth. Terra is also the name of the planet in some Romance languages, languages that evolved from Latin, like Italian and Portuguese, while in other Romance languages the word gave rise to names with slightly altered spellings, like the Spanish Tierra and the French Terre.
There are a number of adjectives for the planet Earth. The word "earthly" is derived from "Earth". From the Latin Terra comes terran, terrestrial, and (via French) terrene, and from the Latin Tellus comes tellurian and telluric.
The oldest material found in the Solar System is dated to 4.5682 Ga (billion years) ago. By 4.54 Ga the primordial Earth had formed. The bodies in the Solar System formed and evolved with the Sun. In theory, a solar nebula partitions a volume out of a molecular cloud by gravitational collapse, which begins to spin and flatten into a circumstellar disk, and then the planets grow out of that disk with the Sun. A nebula contains gas, ice grains, and dust (including primordial nuclides). According to nebular theory, planetesimals formed by accretion, with the primordial Earth being estimated as likely taking anywhere from 70 to 100 million years to form.
Estimates of the age of the Moon range from 4.5 Ga to significantly younger. A leading hypothesis is that it was formed by accretion from material loosed from Earth after a Mars-sized object with about 10% of Earth's mass, named Theia, collided with Earth. It hit Earth with a glancing blow and some of its mass merged with Earth. Between approximately 4.0 and 3.8 Ga, numerous asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment caused significant changes to the greater surface environment of the Moon and, by inference, to that of Earth.
Earth's atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity and outgassing. Water vapor from these sources condensed into the oceans, augmented by water and ice from asteroids, protoplanets, and comets. Sufficient water to fill the oceans may have been on Earth since it formed. In this model, atmospheric greenhouse gases kept the oceans from freezing when the newly forming Sun had only 70% of its current luminosity. By 3.5 Ga, Earth's magnetic field was established, which helped prevent the atmosphere from being stripped away by the solar wind.
As the molten outer layer of Earth cooled it formed the first solid crust, which is thought to have been mafic in composition. The first continental crust, which was more felsic in composition, formed by the partial melting of this mafic crust. The presence of grains of the mineral zircon of Hadean age in Eoarchean sedimentary rocks suggests that at least some felsic crust existed as early as 4.4 Ga, only 140 Ma after Earth's formation. There are two main models of how this initial small volume of continental crust evolved to reach its current abundance: (1) a relatively steady growth up to the present day, which is supported by the radiometric dating of continental crust globally and (2) an initial rapid growth in the volume of continental crust during the Archean, forming the bulk of the continental crust that now exists, which is supported by isotopic evidence from hafnium in zircons and neodymium in sedimentary rocks. The two models and the data that support them can be reconciled by large-scale recycling of the continental crust, particularly during the early stages of Earth's history.
New continental crust forms as a result of plate tectonics, a process ultimately driven by the continuous loss of heat from Earth's interior. Over the period of hundreds of millions of years, tectonic forces have caused areas of continental crust to group together to form supercontinents that have subsequently broken apart. At approximately 750 Ma, one of the earliest known supercontinents, Rodinia, began to break apart. The continents later recombined to form Pannotia at 600–540 Ma, then finally Pangaea, which also began to break apart at 180 Ma.
The most recent pattern of ice ages began about 40 Ma, and then intensified during the Pleistocene about 3 Ma. High- and middle-latitude regions have since undergone repeated cycles of glaciation and thaw, repeating about every 21,000, 41,000 and 100,000 years. The Last Glacial Period, colloquially called the "last ice age", covered large parts of the continents, to the middle latitudes, in ice and ended about 11,700 years ago.
Chemical reactions led to the first self-replicating molecules about four billion years ago. A half billion years later, the last common ancestor of all current life arose. The evolution of photosynthesis allowed the Sun's energy to be harvested directly by life forms. The resultant molecular oxygen (O2) accumulated in the atmosphere and due to interaction with ultraviolet solar radiation, formed a protective ozone layer (O3) in the upper atmosphere. The incorporation of smaller cells within larger ones resulted in the development of complex cells called eukaryotes. True multicellular organisms formed as cells within colonies became increasingly specialized. Aided by the absorption of harmful ultraviolet radiation by the ozone layer, life colonized Earth's surface. Among the earliest fossil evidence for life is microbial mat fossils found in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone in Western Australia, biogenic graphite found in 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks in Western Greenland, and remains of biotic material found in 4.1 billion-year-old rocks in Western Australia. The earliest direct evidence of life on Earth is contained in 3.45 billion-year-old Australian rocks showing fossils of microorganisms.
During the Neoproterozoic, 1000 to 539 Ma, much of Earth might have been covered in ice. This hypothesis has been termed "Snowball Earth", and it is of particular interest because it preceded the Cambrian explosion, when multicellular life forms significantly increased in complexity. Following the Cambrian explosion, 535 Ma, there have been at least five major mass extinctions and many minor ones. Apart from the proposed current Holocene extinction event, the most recent was 66 Ma, when an asteroid impact triggered the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs and other large reptiles, but largely spared small animals such as insects, mammals, lizards and birds. Mammalian life has diversified over the past 66 Mys, and several million years ago, an African ape species gained the ability to stand upright. This facilitated tool use and encouraged communication that provided the nutrition and stimulation needed for a larger brain, which led to the evolution of humans. The development of agriculture, and then civilization, led to humans having an influence on Earth and the nature and quantity of other life forms that continues to this day.
Earth's expected long-term future is tied to that of the Sun. Over the next 1.1 billion years, solar luminosity will increase by 10%, and over the next 3.5 billion years by 40%. Earth's increasing surface temperature will accelerate the inorganic carbon cycle, possibly reducing CO2 concentration to levels lethally low for current plants (10 ppm for C4 photosynthesis) in approximately 100–900 million years. A lack of vegetation would result in the loss of oxygen in the atmosphere, making current animal life impossible. Due to the increased luminosity, Earth's mean temperature may reach 100 °C (212 °F) in 1.5 billion years, and all ocean water will evaporate and be lost to space, which may trigger a runaway greenhouse effect, within an estimated 1.6 to 3 billion years. Even if the Sun were stable and eternal, a significant fraction of the water in the modern oceans would descend into the mantle, due to reduced steam venting from mid-ocean ridges as the core of the Earth slowly cools.
The Sun will evolve to become a red giant in about 5 billion years. Models predict that the Sun will expand to roughly 1 AU (150 million km; 93 million mi), about 250 times its present radius. Earth's fate is less clear. As a red giant, the Sun will lose roughly 30% of its mass, so, without tidal effects, Earth will move to an orbit 1.7 AU (250 million km; 160 million mi) from the Sun when the star reaches its maximum radius, otherwise, with tidal effects, it may enter the Sun's atmosphere and be vaporized, with the heavier elements sinking to the core of the dying sun.
Earth has a rounded shape, through hydrostatic equilibrium, with an average diameter of 12,742 kilometres (7,918 mi), making it the fifth largest planetary sized and largest terrestrial object of the Solar System.
Due to Earth's rotation it has the shape of an ellipsoid, bulging at its equator; its diameter is 43 kilometres (27 mi) longer there than at its poles. Earth's shape also has local topographic variations; the largest local variations, like the Mariana Trench (10,925 metres or 35,843 feet below local sea level), shortens Earth's average radius by 0.17% and Mount Everest (8,848 metres or 29,029 feet above local sea level) lengthens it by 0.14%.[n 6] Since Earth's surface is farthest out from its center of mass at its equatorial bulge, the summit of the volcano Chimborazo in Ecuador (6,384.4 km or 3,967.1 mi) is its farthest point out. Parallel to the rigid land topography the ocean exhibits a more dynamic topography.
To measure the local variation of Earth's topography, geodesy employs an idealized Earth producing a geoid shape. Such a shape is gained if the ocean is idealized, covering Earth completely and without any perturbations such as tides and winds. The result is a smooth but irregular geoid surface, providing a mean sea level as a reference level for topographic measurements.
Earth's surface is the boundary between the atmosphere, and the solid Earth and oceans. Defined in this way, it has an area of about 510 million km2 (197 million sq mi). Earth can be divided into two hemispheres: by latitude into the polar Northern and Southern hemispheres; or by longitude into the continental Eastern and Western hemispheres.
Most of Earth's surface is ocean water: 70.8% or 361 million km2  (139 million sq mi). This vast pool of salty water is often called the world ocean, and makes Earth with its dynamic hydrosphere a water world or ocean world. Indeed, in Earth's early history the ocean may have covered Earth completely. The world ocean is commonly divided into the Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, Antarctic or Southern Ocean, and Arctic Ocean, from largest to smallest. The ocean covers Earth's oceanic crust, with the shelf seas covering the shelves of the continental crust to a lesser extent. The oceanic crust forms large oceanic basins with features like abyssal plains, seamounts, submarine volcanoes, oceanic trenches, submarine canyons, oceanic plateaus, and a globe-spanning mid-ocean ridge system. At Earth's polar regions, the ocean surface is covered by seasonally variable amounts of sea ice that often connects with polar land, permafrost and ice sheets, forming polar ice caps.
Earth's land covers 29.2%, or 149 million km2 (58 million sq mi) of Earth's surface. The land surface includes many islands around the globe, but most of the land surface is taken by the four continental landmasses, which are (in descending order): Africa-Eurasia, America (landmass), Antarctica, and Australia (landmass). These landmasses are further broken down and grouped into the continents. The terrain of the land surface varies greatly and consists of mountains, deserts, plains, plateaus, and other landforms. The elevation of the land surface varies from a low point of -418 m (-1,371 ft) at the Dead Sea, to a maximum altitude of 8,848 m (29,029 ft) at the top of Mount Everest. The mean height of land above sea level is about 797 m (2,615 ft).
Land can be covered by surface water, snow, ice, artificial structures or vegetation. Most of Earth's land hosts vegetation, but considerable amounts of land are ice sheets (10%, not including the equally large area of land under permafrost) or deserts (33%)
The pedosphere is the outermost layer of Earth's land surface and is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes. Soil is crucial for land to be arable. Earth's total arable land is 10.7% of the land surface, with 1.3% being permanent cropland. Earth has an estimated 16.7 million km2 (6.4 million sq mi) of cropland and 33.5 million km2 (12.9 million sq mi) of pastureland.
The land surface and the ocean floor form the top of Earth's crust, which together with parts of the upper mantle form Earth's lithosphere. Earth's crust may be divided into oceanic and continental crust. Beneath the ocean-floor sediments, the oceanic crust is predominantly basaltic, while the continental crust may include lower density materials such as granite, sediments and metamorphic rocks. Nearly 75% of the continental surfaces are covered by sedimentary rocks, although they form about 5% of the mass of the crust.
Earth's surface topography comprises both the topography of the ocean surface, and the shape of Earth's land surface. The submarine terrain of the ocean floor has an average bathymetric depth of 4 km, and is as varied as the terrain above sea level. Earth's surface is continually being shaped by internal plate tectonic processes including earthquakes and volcanism; by weathering and erosion driven by ice, water, wind and temperature; and by biological processes including the growth and decomposition of biomass into soil.
Earth's mechanically rigid outer layer of Earth's crust and upper mantle, the lithosphere, is divided into tectonic plates. These plates are rigid segments that move relative to each other at one of three boundaries types: at convergent boundaries, two plates come together; at divergent boundaries, two plates are pulled apart; and at transform boundaries, two plates slide past one another laterally. Along these plate boundaries, earthquakes, volcanic activity, mountain-building, and oceanic trench formation can occur. The tectonic plates ride on top of the asthenosphere, the solid but less-viscous part of the upper mantle that can flow and move along with the plates.
As the tectonic plates migrate, oceanic crust is subducted under the leading edges of the plates at convergent boundaries. At the same time, the upwelling of mantle material at divergent boundaries creates mid-ocean ridges. The combination of these processes recycles the oceanic crust back into the mantle. Due to this recycling, most of the ocean floor is less than 100 Ma old. The oldest oceanic crust is located in the Western Pacific and is estimated to be 200 Ma old. By comparison, the oldest dated continental crust is 4,030 Ma, although zircons have been found preserved as clasts within Eoarchean sedimentary rocks that give ages up to 4,400 Ma, indicating that at least some continental crust existed at that time.
Earth's interior, like that of the other terrestrial planets, is divided into layers by their chemical or physical (rheological) properties. The outer layer is a chemically distinct silicate solid crust, which is underlain by a highly viscous solid mantle. The crust is separated from the mantle by the Mohorovicic discontinuity. The thickness of the crust varies from about 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) under the oceans to 30-50 km for the continents. The crust and the cold, rigid, top of the upper mantle are collectively known as the lithosphere, which is divided into independently moving tectonic plates.
Beneath the lithosphere is the asthenosphere, a relatively low-viscosity layer on which the lithosphere rides. Important changes in crystal structure within the mantle occur at 410 and 660 km (250 and 410 mi) below the surface, spanning a transition zone that separates the upper and lower mantle. Beneath the mantle, an extremely low viscosity liquid outer core lies above a solid inner core. Earth's inner core may be rotating at a slightly higher angular velocity than the remainder of the planet, advancing by 0.1-0.5° per year, although both somewhat higher and much lower rates have also been proposed. The radius of the inner core is about one-fifth of that of Earth. The density increases with depth. Among the Solar System's planetary-sized objects, Earth is the object with the highest density.
Earth's mass is approximately 5.97 x 1024 kg (5.970 Yg). It is composed mostly of iron (32.1% by mass), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminium (1.4%), with the remaining 1.2% consisting of trace amounts of other elements. Due to gravitational separation, the core is primarily composed of the denser elements: iron (88.8%), with smaller amounts of nickel (5.8%), sulfur (4.5%), and less than 1% trace elements. The most common rock constituents of the crust are oxides. Over 99% of the crust is composed of various oxides of eleven elements, principally oxides containing silicon (the silicate minerals), aluminium, iron, calcium, magnesium, potassium, or sodium.
Wikipedia, a free-content online encyclopedia written and maintained by a community of volunteers known as Wikipedians, began with its first edit on 15 January 2001, two days after the domain was registered. It grew out of Nupedia, a more structured free encyclopedia, as a way to allow easier and faster drafting of articles and translations.
The technological and conceptual underpinnings of Wikipedia predate this; the earliest known proposal for an online encyclopedia was made by Rick Gates in 1993, and the concept of a free-as-in-freedom online encyclopedia (as distinct from mere open source) was proposed by Richard Stallman in 1998.
Stallman's concept specifically included the idea that no central organization should control editing. This contrasted with contemporary digital encyclopedias such as Microsoft Encarta and Encyclopædia Britannica. In 2001, the license for Nupedia was changed to GFDL, and Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger launched Wikipedia as a complementary project, using an online wiki as a collaborative drafting tool.
While Wikipedia was initially imagined as a place to draft articles and ideas for eventual polishing in Nupedia, it quickly overtook its predecessor, becoming both draft space and home for the polished final product of a global project in hundreds of languages, inspiring a wide range of other online reference projects.
In 2014, Wikipedia had approximately 495 million monthly readers. In 2015, according to comScore, Wikipedia received over 115 million monthly unique visitors from the United States alone. In September 2018, the projects saw 15.5 billion monthly page views.
The use of volunteers was integral in making and maintaining Wikipedia. However, even without the internet, huge complex projects of similar nature had made use of volunteers. Specifically, the creation of the Oxford English Dictionary was conceived with the speech at the London Library, on Guy Fawkes Day, 5 November 1857, by Richard Chenevix Trench. It took about 70 years to complete. Dr. Trench envisioned a grand new dictionary of every word in the English language, and to be used democratically and freely. According to author Simon Winchester, "The undertaking of the scheme, he said, was beyond the ability of any one man. To peruse all of English literature – and to comb the London and New York newspapers and the most literate of the magazines and journals – must be instead 'the combined action of many.' It would be necessary to recruit a team – moreover, a huge one – probably comprising hundreds and hundreds of unpaid amateurs, all of them working as volunteers."
There was some hesitation among editors about binding Nupedia too closely to a wiki-style workflow. After a Nupedia wiki was launched under nupedia.com on 10 January 2001, Wales proposed launching the new project under its own name, and Sanger proposed Wikipedia, framing it as "a supplementary project to Nupedia which operates entirely independently." A new wiki was launched at wikipedia.com on Monday 15 January 2001. The bandwidth and server (located in San Diego) used for these initial projects were donated by Bomis. Many former Bomis employees later contributed content to the encyclopedia: notably Tim Shell, co-founder and later CEO of Bomis, and programmer Jason Richey.
Wales stated in December 2008 that he made Wikipedia's first edit, a test edit with the text "Hello, World!", but this may have been to an old version of Wikipedia which soon after was scrapped and replaced by a restart. The first recovered edit to Wikipedia.com was to the HomePage on 15 January 2001, reading "This is the new WikiPedia!"; it can be found here. The existence of the project was formally announced and an appeal for volunteers to engage in content creation was made to the Nupedia mailing list on 17 January 2001.
In March 2002, following the withdrawal of funding by Bomis during the dot-com bust, Sanger left both Nupedia and Wikipedia. By 2002, he and Wales differed in their views on how best to manage open encyclopedias. Both still supported the open-collaboration concept, but they disagreed on how to handle disruptive editors, specific roles for experts, and the best way to guide the project to success.
Wales went on to establish self-governance and bottom-up self-direction by editors on Wikipedia. He made it clear that he would not be involved in the community's day-to-day management, but would encourage it to learn to self-manage and find its own best approaches. As of 2007, Wales mostly restricted his role to occasional input on serious matters, executive activity, advocacy of knowledge, and encouragement of similar reference projects.
Sanger said he is an "inclusionist" and is open to almost anything, and proposed that experts still have a place in the Web 2.0 world. In 2006 he founded Citizendium, an open encyclopedia that used real names for contributors to reduce disruptive editing, and hoped to facilitate "gentle expert guidance" to increase the accuracy of its content. Decisions about article content were to be up to the community, but the site was to include a statement about "family-friendly content".
For two decades, Google Maps has been more than just a navigation tool; it's a window to the world, helping us discover new places, plan adventures, and revisit cherished memories. In honor of Google Maps’ 20th anniversary, we're excited to share some of Canada's most-loved locations according to the Google Maps Community.
From vibrant city streets to serene natural landscapes, Canadians and tourists alike have been exploring, reviewing, and photographing the places that make Canada special. Based on user reviews and photo contributions, here's a look at the top-20 locations across the country.
A trusted guide to the world of food, Google Maps helps people uncover hidden culinary gems and make informed dining decisions. With a wealth of reviews spanning diverse cuisines, Maps is a go-to resource for culinary inspiration. Here are the most-reviewed restaurants across Canada.
Step back in time at Casa Loma, a majestic Gothic Revival castle in Toronto. Discover rich history and diverse cultures at the Royal BC Museum, or journey through human history at the Museum of Civilization. These top-rated Canadian museums have earned tens of thousands of reviews and 4+ star ratings on Google Maps.
Outdoor adventurers will find endless inspiration in Canada's breathtaking landscapes. From the iconic trails of Johnston Canyon, Athabasca Falls, and Mono Cliffs, to the serene urban oases of Stanley Park, High Park, and Mount Royal, Google Maps users have shown a clear appreciation for Canada's natural beauty. These are the most-photographed hiking trails and most-reviewed parks across the country.
From sun-soaked summers to snowy winters, Canada's appeal is year-round. Enjoy the sandy shores of English Bay, Woodbine Beach, or Baie de Beauport, or the snowy slopes of Blue Mountain, Grouse Mountain, and Mont-Tremblant. Here are the most-reviewed beaches and ski resorts in Canada.
Millions travel to the Great North each year, drawn to its unique experiences. From the scenic Fallsview in Niagara, to Toronto’s iconic CN Tower, to the historical Old Port in Montreal, and the remote beauty of the Cape Spear Lighthouse in St. John's, Google Maps users have captured it all. Here are the most-photographed visitor attractions in Canada.
Google Maps has transformed how we explore and interact with the world. Its evolution—from Street View and real-time traffic updates to AI-powered features like Immersive View and Lens—has gone beyond navigation, helping people discover hidden gems and share experiences. To delve deeper into Google Maps' 20-year history, read the Keywords blog here.
Dedicated to promoting positive mental health and reducing stigma. UVic students share their personal stories and tips for maintaining wellness. Learn ways to increase your happiness and wellbeing and decrease your stress as you navigate life as a student.
Mindyourmind exists in the space where mental health, wellness, engagement and technology meet. We work with young people aged 14 to 29 to co-create interactive tools and innovative resources to build capacity and resilience.
CMHA Calgary’s YouthSMART (Youth Supporting Mental Health and Resiliency Together) integrates collaborative, youth-initiated mental health learning opportunities in local junior and senior high schools.
Students and recent graduates sharing personal experiences with specific mental health difficulties, the actions they are taking to create change and how to tackle different challenges at university and navigate university and graduate life.
Machine learning (ML) isn’t new. However, the field of big data is revitalizing the subject and more organizations are relying on ML models to scale their operations, support staff in working better and faster, to uncover hidden insights from data, or even confirm and challenge underlying assumptions. This is creating widespread interest in related topics with the C-suite, and across business lines and job roles, as enterprises embrace the value of artificial intelligence (AI) and ML. To make a disruptive organizational impact, AI and ML need to be understood and trusted. By consulting these ML blogs from authoritative individuals and organizations that satisfy different skill levels, readers can increase their understanding and comfort level in these areas, get pressing questions answered, and connect with others who have experience using them to great benefit.
OpenAI comes from industry experts who want to bring AI to the masses. It's linked to the non-profit research company OpenAI, co-chaired by Elon Musk and Sam Altman, and sponsored by companies such as Amazon Web Services, Microsoft, and Infosys who are trying to make AI accessible—hence the name. Contributors discuss their collective efforts to promote and advance AI technologies through long-term research. It’s a valuable resource for anyone interested in the future of AI.
Distill concentrates on making ML and AI more accessible for readers. Traditional research can be difficult to consume, so Distill communicates ML research in appealing, interactive data visualizations. It acts as a neutral platform for multiple authors to publish together, and articles are peer-reviewed, appearing in Google Scholar. Distill is also registered with the Library of Congress and CrossRef.
Machine Learning is Fun is a valuable, introductory blog. It covers the tenets of ML through interactive tutorials and practical examples, which make it easier to see the useful applications to different businesses and industries. Author Adam Geitgey is a former software developer who now consults organizations on implementing machine learning. He believes ML is integral to the future of software and that developers should have a strong working knowledge, so he provides guides and techniques to help them develop and grow.
A machine learning developer with several AI-related degrees, Jason intended his Machine Learning Mastery blog for new developers getting started in the field. He was once an amateur developer and wants to help others, imparting lessons learned during his professional journey and sharing the tools that helped him most. The blog, plus his email course and newsletter, accommodate any level of expertise.
The artificial intelligence research department at UC Berkeley created this blog to convey research findings and important information about their AI-related work. Covering a spectrum of research—from natural language processing to robotics—grad students and faculty contribute content for both experts and the general population to consume.
This media channel delivers comprehensive coverage of the latest AI-related technology and business news. It’s designed to keep executives ahead of the curve with artificial intelligence and machine learning. AI Trends features interviews with and thought leadership pieces from top business leaders, as well as in-depth articles on the business of AI.
Amazon is heavily involved in ML, using algorithms in nearly all areas of its business to create leads. Algorithms suggest relevant products for customers in search results, recommend products based on recent purchases, and optimize faster product distribution and shipping from warehouses to customers. The blog features projects and guides that reveal industry strides to readers and covers ML uses in Amazon Web Services technology.
Apple’s advancements in voice recognition, predictive text, and autocorrect leveraged for Siri signal some of its machine learning work. And their newest iPhone features ML predominantly in its processor, performing trillions of operations per second; it’s ML in your hands. Apple Machine Learning Journal is a helpful look at how ML shapes their different technologies, and Apple engineers give perspective on how their work influences the transformation of ML.
Google helped revolutionize machine learning, so to see their level of ML research isn’t surprising. Machine learning and AI critically support how Google technology works—from their search algorithms that redefined web searches, to Google Maps influencing how we navigate destinations, and now their self-driving car is changing the auto industry. Google makes its work available through posts discussing their published research and how its technology is used by others to influence AI innovation.
With greater understanding or appreciation for ML and AI, it’s easier to dispel the myths that may leave doubt about their full potential and to responsibly apply these productive solutions. A Tableau blog post recently explored three common machine learning misconceptions—reviewing them will help you discern fact from fiction in all the industry noise.
For anyone ready to embrace these models and put them to work, Andrew Beers, CTO at Tableau Software, wrote about how to effectively and responsibly apply AI techniques taking cues from brands such as Box, eBay, OpenTable, and Slack. And the rise of explainable AI (i.e. techniques in AI which can be trusted and easily understood) topped Tableau’s 2019 annual report of influential BI trends, signaling that more organizations are putting these trained, data-driven models to use in how they operate and solve complex challenges.
Tableau does not officially endorse any products, publications, or opinions therein listed on this webpage, and as such this page does not engage with any affiliate link programs. This article is intended purely for educational purposes and the above information about products and publications is made available so that readers can make informed decisions for themselves.
Hi, my name is Kathleen, and I am going to be blogging about music! I really love music and it has impacted my life in so many ways that I would have never imagined such a broad, yet general, yet subjective matter could cover it all!
I think that music is something that everyone can enjoy. It has something for everyone and there are so many ways to access it that honestly, sometimes I wonder how people do not know more about it. For example, you do not even have to look for the most popular music, or the “coolest” artist. Even just humming your own tune is like connecting to other people through a collective creativity. This is beautiful because we do not all need to listen to the popular stuff, the cool stuff, or emulate the cool rock stars, the “popular” kids, or the “indie” kids, etc. I do not like those stereotypes because I believe that they keep people outside of the music community by saying that you must enjoy a certain type of music to be interesting and recognized within the community.
While it is somewhat true that you need to be famous or successful in order to make a living from music, you need to be able to be different and stand out. I think that people should not feel pressure to be famous and make an abundance of money. Music can be your livelihood and pay your bills, as for famous people. But it can also be a hobby or a passion, too.  And there's nothing wrong with keeping a passion to yourself. So, if you feel pressured to be famous and have all this luck and success from your music, I believe you do not need to feel that way. I am saying that from firsthand experience…
During the pandemic, while I was in online school, I went through a patch of hyper-fixating on those super successful, young musicians. They were the same age as me! I was honestly jealous of them. But over time, I realized that they also had a spur of luck. I told myself that their luck was going to be mine—that all I was missing was that luck. I was going to do everything in my power to get that luck and get to that place where they were. And maybe I was hazy from online school taking up my life, or maybe it was also childish behavior that fed into these ideas. But I also think that if you’re a musician and have a passion for music, you will probably feel the pressure of success at some point. And I feel for people who feel that way because it is not just for music. It is for anything. People feel that their only salvation is to be famous. If you are trying to pay the bills, that may be true. But you can still perform even if it can't fully support you financially. You can still meet new people and grow your passion without it having to be your full-time job. There is another side of music, the more wholesome side, wherein you make music and participate in the music community just for the sake of doing it. And this is the idea I want to cultivate with this blog, starting with a conversation about one of my favorite bands, Vulfpeck.
A while ago, my band teacher told me that he was playing in a church later that week and that he was performing a song by a funk band called Vulfpeck. He played me one of the songs by the band, and I was immediately intrigued. I had never heard of this band before nor heard the song, and it was amazing. The song was called “Christmas in L.A.,” with the lead singer being Theo Katzman. I was blown away by the tightness of the band. They were so connected and well-coordinated. Vulfpeck really emulates the wholesomeness of the music community. They add so many intricate details, for instance—in one song—bells, to make each song intriguing. Their music is a dreamy and upbeat escape that snaps you into a haven of funk. I have been opened to a whole world of their music filled with impactful, slow, meaningful, emotional and all-around beautiful songs. And there are also some songs—songs that are almost humorous like one called “Funky Duck," or one called “It Gets Funkier." Their humorous attitude towards their playing is also really inspiring. In the music video for one of their songs, "Birds of a Feather," their band leader, Jack Stratton, is playing pancakes and hitting them with spatulas instead of drumsticks. It is hilarious! You can tell that they have a lighthearted attitude towards their music, and this is something I want to emulate. The songs are a great escape when I am feeling down or if I want to celebrate my happiness. I do not think I will stop listening to them anytime soon—they’re great!
I hope that my discussion of some of the aspects of the music community as well as the band Vulfpeck has inspired something in you, or changed your perspective, or introduced you to something new. Please enjoy this video of me playing a cover of the song I mentioned, "Christmas in L.A.," and have a great day!
I’m Jeff, a now old man based in Palm Springs, California, who’s just a wannabe DJ - of my own radio station! Not previously having an outlet to express my passion for music, one day a friend suggested that I create a music blog. After giving it a bit of thought, I decided to do just that in the summer of 2015.
I first became interested in music before I started kindergarten, when I listened to my much older brother’s rock’n’roll records and my parents’ Frank Sinatra, Ray Charles and Dean Martin records and musical & movie soundtracks. By my teens, I was obsessed with music and song lists and would listen to the various San Francisco Bay Area radio stations’ weekly Top 30 countdowns, as well as the legendary Kasey Kasem’s Weekly Top 40, and have been a music freak ever since. (Some friends would place the emphasis on “freak”). My music tastes are very eclectic – my favorites are classic and alternative rock, soul, R&B, funk, 80’s punk and new wave, dream pop and classical, but I also like hard rock, metal, death metal, grunge, folk rock, pop, EDM, synth-pop, Brit-pop, hip-hop, some rap, blues and light jazz.
Each week I post my Top 30 favorite songs, and occasionally post lists of favorite songs for a specific year or decade, or a particular theme of interest. I enjoy discovering and supporting indie artists and bands, so I write reviews of their music or articles about them to help promote them to a wider audience. Also, I occasionally share interesting articles or commentaries written by others about the music industry, as well as music videos I really like.
I hope readers will enjoy my posts, and comments are always welcome.
I started this blog in August of 2005 on a whim. Never could I have expected it to become such an important part of my life, both personally and professionally. In fact, for the first few years of blogging, I kept my identity here firmly hidden because I was sure the blog would remain nothing more than a little passion project. It is nearly impossible to remember what online life was really like in those days, but I'll always treasure the feeling of utter bliss of discovery and kinship I stumbled upon when I started blogging and found an entire community of like-minded people right on the other side of this screen. 
It is hard to quantify what this blog means to me, though if we're talking numbers, there are nearly 900 posts and almost 30,000 comments collected here. Thanks to The Wednesday Chef, I have written two books and have another on the way. I wrote a monthly food column for several years. I have made countless connections and friends for life. The person I used to be is captured here for posterity, as are the memories and sensations of my former life in New York and the early years of my life back in Berlin. This is the closest I ever came to keeping a real diary. Not only are many of my favorite and most beloved recipes gathered here, but so are countless dear and tender memories, like summers in Italy over the years, the wobbly transition from New York to Berlin, the early years of life with children, and the transformation I made from blogger to book author. Now it's time for me to finally put up the "Closed for Business" sign here, though the archives of The Wednesday Chef will stay on for as long as I have any say in the matter. 
You can subscribe to my newsletter Letter from Berlin at Substack now, either for free or with a couple varieties of paying options. Your support enables me to continue making a creative life. In the newsletter, I share recipes, of course, as well as deeper thoughts on books I'm reading, essays about family life and creativity, and inside peeks at the process of writing another cookbook. We can still connect in the comments there and I look forward to continuing the conversation we've been having for almost 18 years now.
I am deeply grateful to everyone who ever followed a link to find me online. You allowed me to make my dreams of being a writer become a reality. You have read along here and commented with wisdom and care and affection. You have come to my readings and events and bought my books and cooked my recipes. And you have connected to the stories I've told about the important people in my life and blessed me with your interest and kindness and appetite.
I love to cook, but I haven’t always. In fact, for most of my early adult life, cooking dinner usually meant microwaving a frozen dinner or adding boiling water to something that came from a box. It wasn’t until I got married that I started eating real food because I married a guy who cooks. I started joining him in the kitchen and realized that cooking could be fun. Eating real food was really fun. And gaining confidence as a home chef? That was life changing!
I'm David Leiter, the guy behind this website. I'm an American who's been traveling the world full time for 9 years now.
I started this travel blog in 2019 to document my own international trips, share my photos, and help others learn how to travel the world and find some really good spots off the beaten path.
All of the writing and pictures on this site come from my own personal experience.
I'm currently based in Bali, Indonesia, where I met my wife Intan, who’s a Bali local. Now she joins me on these adventures too.
Together, we've done some bucket list hikes, climbed active volcanoes, seen exotic wildlife, and visited some spectacular castles, temples, and monuments around the world.
I've worked with and been featured by BBC Travel, NBC News, Time, and other companies.
I haven’t been everywhere, but it’s on my list. I hope this world travel blog can help and inspire you in your own journeys as well!
Common Corpus makes it possible to train LLMs on truly open data, leading to auditable models and a more democratized LLM ecosystem. This new dataset meets the highest levels of compliance. By providing clear provenance and using permissibly licensed data, Common Corpus exceeds the requirements of even the strictest regulations on AI training data, such as the EU AI Act. Pleias has also taken extensive steps to ensure GDPR compliance, by developing custom procedures to enable personally identifiable information (PII) removal for multilingual data. This makes Common Corpus an ideal foundation for secure, enterprise-grade models. Models trained on Common Corpus will be resilient to an increasingly regulated industry.
As it stands, open data is limited for English; however, even for relatively high-resource languages like French and German, the open data landscape is far worse. It is important to be developing datasets for a wide variety of languages to reduce the over-reliance of English in LLM development in order to broaden access and increase equity surrounding the economic benefits that accompany language technologies like LLMs. Common Corpus primarily contains English and French data, but there is a significant amount of data in German, Spanish, Italian, and other European languages.
Common Corpus is composed of five main sub-corpora: OpenGovernment, OpenCulture,  OpenScience, OpenWeb, and OpenSource. Each of these is distinct in style, content, and quality and comes from varied sources. The result is a diverse dataset suitable for training a general-purpose model.
OpenGovernment contains Finance Commons, a dataset of financial documents from a range of governmental and regulatory bodies. Finance Commons is a multimodal dataset, including both text and PDF corpora. OpenGovernment also contains Legal Commons, a dataset of legal and administrative texts. OpenCulture contains cultural heritage data like books and newspapers. Many of these texts come from the 18th and 19th centuries, or even earlier. 
OpenScience data primarily comes from publicly available academic and scientific publications, which are most often released as PDFs. OpenWeb contains datasets from YouTube Commons, a dataset of transcripts from public domain YouTube videos, and websites like Stack Exchange. Finally, OpenSource comprises code collected from GitHub repositories which were permissibly licensed. 
Ensuring high data quality is important as it has been shown to positively impact model performance. Curation for Common Corpus is unlike that for web data like Common Crawl, which primarily entails deduplication and text quality filtering. There are well-established tools and procedures for this, especially for English, for which there is the most web data. Pleias has taken an individualized approach to curating each dataset, as there is no one-size-fits-all solution to ensuring high-quality training data. Each sub-corpus in Common Corpus was filtered and curated using a different combination of procedures.
OpenCulture required multiple curation steps. First was correcting digitization errors. Most of these texts were scanned and digitized with Optical Character Recognition (OCR), which often leaves mistakes and unwanted digitization artifacts. Pleias created a suite of custom tools for this dataset, including an OCR correction model, OCRonos-Vintage, which Pleias trained from scratch and have made publicly available. At 124 million parameters, it runs on CPU and GPU. As a small model, it has an extremely high throughput, making it efficient when running at scale. It is able to accurately fix incorrect spacing, replace incorrect words, and generally correct broken text structures. This step is essential for using data that is the result of public digitization efforts, which were the source of most of the cultural heritage data. 
As the OpenCulture texts are mainly historical, some of the texts contain toxic or harmful content, because social norms have changed drastically, especially surrounding language used to describe minoritized groups. Pleias developed a pipeline for reducing the amount of toxic content in the dataset, which is described in a recently published preprint about, where there is expanded discussion about the motivation and method used. The key component of the pipeline is the toxicity classifier developed to specifically handle the unique features of the dataset: historical, multilingual data with OCR errors. Pleias also released the training data and the code for the classifier. To curate OpenCulture, toxicity ratings from the classifier to identify extremely harmful content and then it was removed or transformed via synthetic rewriting. The resulting dataset has a greatly reduced potential for societal harm, while not compromising textual quality or dataset size. This is an ongoing research area at Pleias, with the goal of continuing to develop safe and fair models and datasets. 
Datasets derived from PDF, such as the data in OpenScience, were not created by simply extracting plain text, as this loses important contextual and stylistic information about the structure of the text, such as headings. Instead, using a vision-language model (VLM), the structure and layouts of the PDFs were parsed, then the text was extracted in a way that is sensitive to the layout and formatting of each document.
The natural language data was filtered for quality similar to the approach used by FineWeb, where content with low educational content was removed. For the code dataset, however, there was a multi-step approach. First, key programming languages were identified. Files in other programming languages and data files were removed. Then code segments were annotated using an existing tool, ArmoRM, which uses features such as complexity, style, and explanation to score code quality. All code that fell below the 20th percentile in quality rating was removed.
The resulting dataset is unlike other open datasets, which are composed in large part of web data. Common Corpus is composed of books, newspapers, scientific articles, government and legal documents, code, and more. This can help develop models which have generalizable capabilities for a wide variety of tasks. For example, the inclusion of scientific and legal documents is intended to increase world knowledge of LLMs trained on this corpus and increase factual outputs. Code data can be used not only to train code-generation models, but has been shown to improve reasoning capabilities for natural language generation. 
In terms of developing models with users in mind, Common Corpus is well-suited to train models for creative composition. In an analysis of one million user interactions with ChatGPT, researchers found that 30% of user requests related to generating creative writing, including fictional story or poetry generation. However, training on creative writing data, such as book text, is difficult, primarily due to legal reasons. Some of the largest AI industry players have been sued for their unauthorized use of books and journalistic material that is protected by copyright. One of the largest open book corpora, Books3, was taken down by anti-piracy groups, making the availability of creative writing content even more limited. OpenCulture contains significant numbers of books and periodicals in at least ten languages, all of which are in the public domain. This allows for the legal training of LLMs to generate creative texts in a variety of languages. Furthermore, as context windows are growing larger, long-context data will increasingly be the bottleneck for developing powerful language models. Book data in OpenCulture are well-suited to this.
Common Corpus also includes multimodal data. PDFs from administrative or academic domains contain rich structured data and high-quality text. These multimodal data allow for the development of practical tools and applications for document processing, which have applications for administrative contexts, but also lead to the development of more and better datasets. 
Common Corpus contributes to the growing ecosystem of open datasets, including Dolma from Ai2 and FineWeb from HuggingFace. Common Corpus diversifies the languages and domains represented in the open data landscape, which helps everyone train better models. The complete dataset is available on HuggingFace: at https://huggingface.co/datasets/PleIAs/common_corpus. Pleias is also releasing a complete technical report, describing the full details about the curation and filtering procedures used, as well as the complete provenance of all of the data. Additionally, the sub-corpora will be released individually in the coming weeks.
As popular as they are, large language models rely on the training datasets they learn on. LLMs consist of multiple hidden layers of deep neural networks, which extract and train their parameters from a significant amount of data sources.  If you train LLMs with questionable datasets, they will be impacted by performance issues like bias and overfitting. Conversely, training a deep learning model with high-quality datasets enables a more accurate and coherent output.
Leading organizations have realized that good language modeling needs more than state-of-the-art machine learning models and training methods. Curating and annotating a diverse training dataset that fairly represents the model’s domain is equally important in implementing neural network artificial intelligence solutions in various industries.
For example, Bloomberg trained a transformer architecture from scratch with decades-worth of carefully curated financial data. The resulting BloombergGPT allows the financial company to empower its clients and perform existing financial-specific NLP tasks faster and with more accuracy. Likewise, HuggingFace has developed a programmer-friendly model StarCode, by training it on code in different programming languages gathered from GitHub.
Machine learning teams face considerable challenges when curating datasets to train AI models. For example,
Data scarcity in some domains results in imbalanced datasets that affect the model’s ability to infer appropriately. Similarly, preparing a diverse dataset proves challenging in certain use cases.
Training a large language model requires an enormous size of datasets. For example, OpenAI trained GPT-3 with 45 TB of textual data curated from various sources.
Organizations must secure datasets containing sensitive information from adversarial threats to protect users’ privacy and comply with industry regulations.
Data annotation is required when fine-tuning LLMs for downstream tasks. When performed manually, organizations must manage the cost of hiring large teams of human labelers and factor in possible annotation errors.
Data labeling platforms like Kili Technology help organizations overcome hurdles when preparing datasets for machine learning projects. Our software provides automated labeling tools that improve annotation efficiency and reduce the number of human-generated errors.
I’m Monica, and with my articles, I intend to inspire, encourage and support you as you get unstuck, make positive life changes and live a life you love – authentic, joyful, meaningful, soulful.
I share real-life stories and experiences, ideas and inspiration, practical wisdom, strategies and resources which you can easily put into practice in your everyday life.  I hope you’ll be inspired to observe your life and yourself, becoming aware of where you stand, who you really are, what’s important to you and what you really want.
So you can feel more purposeful, vibrant and alive. Get through life’s transitions, and its ups and downs, with more ease. Live your life more happily and fully. And give back to the world and to others from there!
Rewind to when the pandemic first began. Isolation became our way of life, and confusion and helplessness were our norm. I remember thinking about how hard it must especially be for those who live alone.
I am a child abuse survivor. Anyone who reads my blog now knows that painful fact about me. What you may not know is that this personal and traumatic life experience caused a snowball effect. I thought about others who are child abuse survivors, and how they were no longer able to seek outside support due to quarantining. My heart broke for people who were struggling alone. I decided to look up child abuse foundations and ask if there was a way I could help.
I came across foundations looking for writers to share their personal life and experiences. I have always loved writing, and I have written poetry from the time I was a child as an outlet for the pain I have felt. I decided to submit my story about the importance of awareness to two of these foundations.
The feedback I received warmed my heart and made me feel like I was helping others to not feel alone. At the same time, I felt that by sharing my story I was taking control of my life. I cannot change what happened to me. However, if I can bring comfort to others, then something good can come from the unimaginable.
I continue to contribute regularly to these amazing organizations.  I wanted to do my part to break the stigma regarding those topics, and the only way I could do so was by example. As a result, I decided to start blogging so I could spread awareness about trauma and mental wellness. This branched into also sharing about what I’ve learned from my relationships and from parenting my daughter.
I mentioned in prior posts that I have Complex Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (C-PTSD), and that I would discuss it more fully in another post. I now feel it is the time to do so. For most of my life I didn’t even know what C-PTSD was, or that I had it. Although it is not officially diagnosed by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), it is related to Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). PTSD is recognized by the DSM-5, and it is caused by extreme fear due to a traumatic event. Symptoms include flashbacks, hypervigilance, and avoidance of things associated with the trauma. C-PTSD is also caused by trauma; however, it is caused by repeated or prolonged trauma. 
My mother also vacillated between loving me and wanting nothing to do with me.  Other forms of trauma were her making me believe that it was my job to take care of her emotional needs in order to feel safe and loved. Growing up with no sense of safety, support, or love caused me to view the world as a very scary place and for me to feel frightened all the time. If you want to read more about my story of abuse, you can read about it here.
My symptoms of C-PTSD include having nightmares about what happened to me, watching something on TV or reading something that causes me to emotionally flashback to my trauma (I don’t visualize it, but I feel the sadness caused from it), and negative self-perception. Additionally, I used to have a distorted perception of my abuser, as I felt completely dependent on her. I still struggle with emotional regulation because certain things trigger me. When I get triggered, I feel completely panic stricken and helpless, just as I did when I was a child. Although I remember most of what happened to me as a child, there are some things I don’t fully remember. Having gaps in your memory or blocking things out entirely is another symptom of C-PTSD (healthline.com, 2018).
My biggest symptom is my ongoing struggle with anxiety. My autonomic nervous system is overactive due to my prolonged and intense trauma. In other words, I am hyperalert and in “flight or fight” mode, feeling continuous anxiety (ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, 2020). I have written numerous blog posts about the physical and emotional symptoms of anxiety, the types of anxiety disorders, and two different articles filled with various strategies and tips to manage anxiety in adults and children.
These personal experiences are not easy to write about. It is not easy to write about having C-PTSD. In fact, I have broken down after writing many of my blog posts, specifically the ones about going no contact with my mom, my relationship with my inner child, and my story of abuse. I am taking wounds that will never fully close and reopening them by pouring my emotional pain onto the computer screen. Despite what many have thought, it does not give me closure or help with my healing because I write from the heart. To do so, I must fully connect with the words I am typing.  In some ways, that means I experience it again.
I want to show the world that scars do not have to be present to be felt. In fact, the scars left by emotional and mental abuse may be invisible, but that does not mean they are not potent. They cause immeasurable damage to the minds and souls of those who experience it.  It is much harder to prove emotional and mental abuse, let alone have someone intervene. This type of abuse will continue unless there is more awareness. With every story I tell, my hope is that one person gains awareness. If one person now understands, perhaps one child won’t have to experience that trauma.
That is where hope comes into play. Hope. It is a word that I have clung to my entire life. Hope allowed me to keep going during my childhood. I would tell myself that maybe if I was hurting, that meant somewhere out there one child wasn’t being abused.  Albeit unrealistic, it was my hope that my pain was sparing someone else. That hope brought comfort to something that no child should ever endure.
I started blogging about my personal life and experiences, and I will continue to do so, because I want to spread hope. I want people to know that no matter what you have endured, no matter how broken and alone you feel, there is always hope. There is so much that can be taken away from each of us, so much pain can be inflicted upon us, but hope is the one thing that is ours. Even in our darkest moments, even when we feel the world has turned its back on us, hold onto hope. Hope is what brings us out of the darkness and into the light.
Hope that you matter and your story matters. Hope that you can rise no matter how many times life has thrown you down. Hope that you can heal. Hope that you have survived and will continue to survive no matter how hard life may be. Hope that you will remember to feel hope even on the days you feel like giving up.
I never thought I would start a blog. Yet here I am blogging my life story. I appreciate every person who has reached out to me with their personal stories or to let me know that my words brought them comfort and hope. To each of you, thank you. You inspire me to keep blogging and to keep sharing.
The POWER blog gives POWER magazine editors and contributing editors an opportunity to share their views of current energy-related issues more frequently than is possible through the magazine. As with all blogs, the entries tend to be more personal and opinionated than the articles you read in POWER, and we invite you to share your opinions about blog postings. The opinions presented in blog postings are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of other POWER editors.